[Dev]: Add new Alert Feature Docs (#1742)
wso2/docs-choreo-dev: en/docs/monitoring-and-insights/alerts-overview.md

# Alert Overview

> This section explains how you can configure alerts for your Choreo components. Setting up alerts allows you to proactively monitor your components ecosystem and take corrective measures when necessary.

Reviewer: @Praveen-98cs this file has to be under `pe-docs/docs/observability/alerts`

### Build Failure Alerts

Build failure alerts inform you if a build failure occurs for your component. This is essential for maintaining smooth development workflows.

### Status Code Alerts

Status code alert triggers when your component returns specific HTTP error(s) (e.g., **403** Forbidden, **500** Internal Error). These alerts help to detect issues affecting your component’s availability or speed.

Configurable parameters

| **Parameter** | **Description**                                                                 |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Status Code   | Error code or series (e.g., 400:Bad Request).                                   |
| Count         | Minimum number of occurrences (e.g., 5).                                        |
| Interval      | Time window (e.g., 5 minutes).                                                  |

!!! note
    Status code alerts are only supported for API proxy component types.

## Configure Alert

Follow these steps to configure an alert:

1. Navigate to the component you wish to configure alerts for.

    !!! info

>         you need to be a **Choreo DevOps** or **Choreo Platform Engineer** inorder to create Alerts.  

Reviewer 2: Do we have a doc explaining how to assign these rules? It would be good to link it here

# Alert Overview

> This section explains how you can configure alerts for your Choreo components. Setting up alerts allows you to proactively monitor your components ecosystem and take corrective measures when necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section explains how to configure alerts for your Choreo components. Alerts enable proactive monitoring of your component ecosystem, allowing you to address issues promptly.
```

> You can configure alerts for each environment within your organization. You can add, modify, or delete alerts per component. Optionally, you can specify a list of emails for each alert configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! tip
    Setting up alerts in only available in the component level
```

> !!! info

Reviewer: We can remove this entire part and move it to the other sections

    - You can configure a maximum of 10 alerts per component.
    - You can add a maximum of 5 email addresses per alert.

Alerts can be categorized as [latency alerts](#latency-alerts) , [traffic alerts](#traffic-alerts) , [resources alerts](#resources-alerts) , [logs alerts](#logs-alerts), [build failure alerts](#build-failure-alerts) and [status code alerts](#status-code-alerts).

## Supported Alert Types

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Choreo supports the following types of alerts to help you monitor and manage your components effectively:

- [Latency alerts](#latency-alerts)
- [Traffic alerts](#traffic-alerts)
- [Resources alerts](#resources-alerts)
- [Log alerts](#logs-alerts)
- [Build failure alerts](#build-failure-alerts)
- [Status code alerts](#status-code-alerts)
```

> ### Latency alerts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Latency Alerts
```

Reviewer: Check other titles as well

Latency alerts notify you if the response latency of a component exceeds a predefined threshold in a given time period. This is useful for components that need to meet specific SLAs and for proactively identifying slow components.

Configurable Parameters:

> - Metric: 99th, 95th, 90th or 50th percentile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Parameter** | **Description**                                                                 |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Metric        | 99th, 95th, 90th, or 50th percentile.                                           |
| Threshold     | Latency in milliseconds (e.g., 1800).                                           |
| Period        | Duration the threshold must be exceeded (e.g., 5 minutes).                      |
```

- Threshold: Latency in milliseconds (e.g., 1800 ).
- Period: Duration the threshold must be exceeded (e.g., 5 minutes).

### Traffic alerts

Traffic alerts notify you when the request count of a component exceeds a predefined threshold. This is useful for managing components with backend traffic limits or monetized backends that require proactive scaling based on incoming traffic.

Configurable Parameters:

> - Threshold: Requests per minute (e.g., 200).

Reviewer: Let's add the same grid here as well

- Period: Monitoring window (e.g., 5 minutes).

> ### Resources alerts

Reviewer 2: `Resource Alerts`

Resource alerts notify you when your component’s CPU or memory usage exceeds the defined thresholds. This ensures you can fix the resources allocations early to avoid performance issues or downtimes.

Configurable Parameters:

- Metric: CPU or Memory.
- Threshold: **mCPU** for CPU and **MiB** for Memory(e.g., 1000).
- Period: Duration the threshold must be exceeded (e.g., 5 minutes).

    !!! Tip
        - **CPU**: mCPU (milliCPU) measures CPU usage in fractions of a core, where 1000m = 1 full core.
        - **Memory**: MiB (Mebibyte) measures memory in binary units, where 1 MiB = 2^20^ bytes.

> ### Logs alerts

Reviewer 2: `Log Alerts`

> ### Logs alerts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Log alerts
```
or Log based alerts

> Logs alerts trigger notifications when a specific phrase appears frequently in your component logs. This helps to identify recurring issues or critical errors quickly, enabling faster troubleshooting.

Reviewer 2: Can't say recurring because users can configure to get alerts even for 1 occurrence

Configurable Parameters:

> - Search Phrase: Keyword or phrase (e.g., failed).

Reviewer 2: `Keyword or phrase to look for to trigger the alert`

> - Count: Minimum occurrences to trigger the alert (e.g., 10).

Reviewer 2: `Minimum number of occurrences`

- Interval: Time window for counting occurrences (e.g., 5 minutes).

> ### Build Failure alerts

Reviewer 2: `Alerts`

> ### Build Failure alerts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Build Failure Alerts
```

> Build Failure alerts inform you if a build failure occurs for your component. This is essential for maintaining smooth development workflows, as it allows quick action to reduce downtime.

Reviewer 2: A failing build won't affect uptime. Hence we can remove that part

> Build Failure alerts inform you if a build failure occurs for your component. This is essential for maintaining smooth development workflows, as it allows quick action to reduce downtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build failure alerts inform you if a build failure occurs for your component. This is essential for maintaining smooth development workflows, as it allows quick action to reduce downtime.
```

> ### Status Code alerts

Reviewer 2: `Alerts`

> Status Code alert triggers when your component returns specific HTTP error(s) (e.g., **403** Forbidden, **500** Internal Error). These alerts help to detect issues affecting your component’s availability or speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status code alert triggers when your component returns specific HTTP error(s) (e.g., **403** Forbidden, **500** Internal Error). These alerts help to detect issues affecting your component’s availability or speed.
```

> Configurable Parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configurable parameters:
```

- Status Code: Error code or series (e.g., 400:Bad Request).
- Count: Minimum occurrences (e.g., 5).
- Interval: Time window (e.g., 5 minutes).

!!! note

>     Currently Status Code alerts only supports api proxy component types.

Reviewer 2: `Status code alerts are currently available only for API Proxy type components`

Author: went with @Suvink's suggestion. 
`Status code alerts are only supported api proxy component types.`

>     Currently Status Code alerts only supports api proxy component types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Status code alerts are only supported api proxy component types.
```

Author: @Suvink don't we have to make api part capital as API?

Reviewer: Yes we have to. I've missed it

Author: finalized one
`Status code alerts are only supported for API proxy component types.`

## Configure Alert

> If you are going to create an alert for the first time, follow the steps given below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow these steps to configure an alert:
```

1. Sign in to the [Choreo Console](https://console.choreo.dev/).

> 2. Ensure you are in the correct organization where you have a project with the component to configure an alert.

Reviewer 2: Not required IMO

> 2. Ensure you are in the correct organization where you have a project with the component to configure an alert.

Reviewer: We can say navigate to the component where you want to setup the alert

> 3. Navigate to the component by clicking on the project with the component to configure an alert.

Reviewer 2: Suggest to change it to `Navigate to the component you wish to configure alerts for`

> 4. Click the component.

Reviewer 2: Not required

    !!! info
        make sure your component is deployed in order to make the alerts work.  

> 5. In the Choreo Console left navigation menu, click **Observability**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. In the left menu, click ** Observability** and then click **Alerts**.
```

> 6. In the left navigation menu on the **Observability** page, click **Alerts**. This opens the **Configure Alerts** pane by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

7. Click **Create Alert Rule** to create a new alert rule.

    ![Create Alert Rule](../assets/img/monitoring-and-insights/alerts/alert-creation.png){.cInlineImage-full}

    ![Create Alert Rule](../assets/img/monitoring-and-insights/alerts/alert-configuration.png){.cInlineImage-full}

> 

Reviewer: Let's add a note somewhere around this section to say that you can  configure a maximum of 10 alerts per component

>     This opens the **Alert Creation** page with the **Latency** alert type selected by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

8. Select the **[Alert Type](#supported-alert-types)** you want to create.
9. Select the **Environment** you want to create the alert for.
10. Select the **Deployment Track** as required.

> 11. In the **Metric** field, select the required metric against which you want to evaluate the alert configuration.

Reviewer 2: This field is not available for all alert types. Hence IMO, we can explain the common configurations (Emails, Environment etc..) and say configure the other fields specific to each alert type

    !!! tip
        The list includes all available options. If there are multiple metrics, you can select the required metric. If there is only one metric to choose, that metric is selected by default, and the field is disabled.

12. In the **Threshold** field, specify the threshold according to the given metric.

    !!! info

>         When the selected metric exceeds the threshold provided, alerts are triggered.

Reviewer: This field is self explanatory right?

13. In the **Emails** field, specify the list of emails that should be notified when the alert is triggered.

    !!! note

>         When adding an email, enter the required email and press enter to add it.

Reviewer: \+ you can only add 5 emails

14. In the **Advanced Configurations** dropdown, you can select the **Period**, the duration which the metric value must remain above the threshold
15. You can also see an **Explanation** window, showing the kind of an alert will generate based on your alert configurations.
16. Click **Create**.

17. Once an alert is successfully added, the alert will be listed in the **Configure Alerts** pane alongside all existing alerts for the component.

18. Each alert can be **edited**, **removed** and **disabled** or **enabled** via this pane.

>     ![Configure Alerts](../assets/img/monitoring-and-insights/alerts/configure-alert-pane.png){.cInlineImage-full}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![Configure Alerts](../assets/img/monitoring-and-insights/alerts/configure-alert-pane.png){.cInlineImage-full}
```
Let's remove these screenshots

    !!! note
        when editing the alert, you can't edit the **Alert Type**, **Environment** and **Deployment Track**.

## Alert History & Notifications

> 

Reviewer: \+ a breif explanation of what these are

### View Alert History

You can check the past alerts that have triggered for your component when you click the  **Alerts History** pane in Choreo Alerts. You can filter the alert history by **Alert Type**, **Environment**, **Deployment Track** or **Version** and **Time Range**.

!!! note  
    When filtering, **API Proxy components** show a **Version** filter and Other components display a **Deployment Track** filter, based on their monitoring context.  

You can click on an alert to expand it and see more details of the triggered alert.

![Alerts History](../assets/img/monitoring-and-insights/alerts/alert-history.png){.cInlineImage-full}

### Email Notifications

> When an alert is triggered, **recipients** added to the alert rule recieve an email with **alert details** including a direct **View Alert** link to Alert page in Choreo console.

Reviewer 2: `recieve` -> `receive`
